
It takes a team effort to pull in a 6,000-pound anchor.  Lending a
hand were Nina Vickers of Hawthorne Cove Marina in Salem,
underwater videographer Stephen Galperin, diver Mehmet
Mandalinci, dive boat owner Jeff Hannigan, and diver Michael
Miller.                          The Salem News / Kirk Williamson


Divers wrest prize 'junk' from sea
 By Larry Blake
 News staff

   DANVERS - "A lot of
 scuba divers bring up artifacts
 from sunken ships, but nothing
 this size," said Faith Ortins of
 Beverly, co-owner of Northeast Scuba.
   "It's not one of the prettiest
 things, but it is one of the biggest," added Michael Miller of
 Danvers, a diver.
   What Miller and three other
 local divers brought up on Saturday was a 13-foot, 6,000-
 pound anchor, encrusted with
 scale and barnacles, from the
 British freighter City of Salisbury, which sank on Graves
 Ledge, about 14 miles off Nahant, 57 years ago.
   The divers hauled the
 anchor into Salem Harbor,
 then trucked it to the Northeast Scuba office on Liberty
 Street in Danvers, across from
 Popes Landing.
  The ship, which had sailed
from India, was carrying an unusual cargo, including many
exotic animals - birds, monkeys,
pythons and cobras - besides
rubber and jute.

  To divers, it became known as
"the zoo wreck," according to the
book "New England's Legacy of
Shipwrecks" by Henry Keatts.

  It had struck an uncharted
ledge and run aground, sinking a
few feet onto the pinnacle of rock
on which it sat.

  The 56-man crew escaped, but
not the animals.  When a much decomposed python, washed ashore
later, some suspected it was a sea
serpent, according to Keatts'
book.

  For several months the ship sat
on the ledge in the water, with
charter boats running tourists to
"the zoo wreck."

  Eventually the ship broke up,
however, and pieces of it were
scattered over the ocean floor.

  "It's a popular diving site,"
Miller said, but "the scattered remains are pretty well pulverized
and spread out over a large area."

  It was Jeff Hannigan of
Tewksbury, owner of the diving
vessel Depth Charge, who found
the anchor nearly 60 feet below
the surface.

  He convinced Miller, Stephen
Galperin of Marblehead and Mehmet Mandalinei of Methuen to
help him float the anchor to the
surface.

  Work began Friday.

  Using five rubber bags that
each provide 1,000 pounds of
buoyancy, the divers managed to
get the anchor almost, but not entirely, to the surface.

  With the weather turning bad,
the divers dropped the anchor
back into the water, but only 35
feet deep this time.  Ortins drove
to Providence to pick up another
bag, to add another 2,000 pounds
of buoyancy.

  The effort was successful Saturday, and the small Depth Charge
towed the floated anchor into Salem Harbor.

   The trip out was only an hour,
but it took eight hours to bring
the anchor back to shore.

   "She's a proud little tug - well,
not a tug, but close," said Miller.

  Ortins noted the 13-foot anchor
is one foot longer than the boat
and 2,000 pounds heavier.

  It took some time for the boat
and its salvage to make it into the
Hawthorne Cove Marina.  The
boat was difficult to maneuver as
it towed the heavy anchor.

   "It was like a mine field of moorings" coming through the harbor, 
Miller said.

  But that was "part of the adventure," said Ortins, who praised
the cooperation of everyone involved: Northeast Scuba, Hawthorne 
Cove Marina and Riverview Landscape Construction of
Middleton.

   The last two companies cooperated in getting the anchor to Danvers: 
Hawthorne hauled the
 anchor out of the water and Riverview drove it to Liberty Street,
 using a dump truck to tow the
 anchor on a trailer.

  The trip through downtown Salem streets drew some stares
Monday morning, they noted.

  "Wreck divers," noted Miller,
"have this strange disease.  They
like bringing junk home, (although) not everyone needs an
anchor in their back yard."

  This "junk," however, will be
put on display.  After letting it dry
out, Miller said he would hammer
out the scale (loose, flaking rust),
then sandblast it, mostly to
"knock off the edges."

   Then it will be painted and preserved, Ortins said, "so everyone
else can look at it."


