it May Not Be The Prettiest Thing To Ever Come Up ...


The steel-hulled City of Salisbury, built in Sunderland, England for the 
Ellerman Lines in 1924, was bound from India to Boston with a cargo of 
exotic animals - birds, monkeys, pythons & cobras - when it was surrounded 
by dense fog and became impaled on an uncharted rocky pinnacle.  Since the 
sinking, many divers have explored the shipwreck, nicknamed the "Zoo 
Wreck", but the huge unwieldy anchor had always seemed unretrievable.  On 
Saturday, April 22nd, four intrepid New England divers made the impossible 
happen.

As with any undertaking of this magnitude the adventure really began on 
the long before when Jeff Hannigan, Ned Jose, and Mike Dulong dove the 
wreck on April 9th.  After 2 dives, they decided that retreiving the anchor 
didn't seem so difficult and further research was necessary.  Next week, with 
John McColley and Mike Miller, Jeff took the D/V Depth Charge out to 
survey the wreck site.  The anchor was laying in 55 feet on a hard bottom 
with no wreckage over it.  Measurements showed the anchor to be 13 feet 
long, 10 feet across the flukes with an 11 foot stock.  We estimated the 
weight at approximently 5600 lbs.  We decided it would be quite an 
adventure to raise the anchor, and besides, it would look great on the lawn at 
Northeast SCUBA.

The next step was to get enough lift bags to send up 2 & 1/2 tons.  We already 
had two 1000 lb lift bags, but needed 3 more at least.  Subsalve in Providence, RI 
is the closest of the handful of manufacturers that make lift bags in this size range.  
So, Faith Ortins called Subsalve and arranged for the shipment of three more 1000 
lb bags.  We calculated that, allowing for the displacement of the sea water, 5000 
lbs would be enough lift to send this beast to the surface.  Subsalve shipped the 
three bags to us on a 2 day guaranteed delivery.  We planned to make the dive on 
Friday.

Thursday afternoon no lift bags had arrived.  We were planning to leave at 5:00 
AM Friday morning, well before any postal sevice worker would consider making 
a delivery to NES.  Faith made a rush trip down to RI to pick up three bags, 
agreeing to return the three in shipment when (and if) they arrived.

Friday dawned clear with brilliant reds in the handful of clouds on the 
eastern horizon.  At 5:00 AM we set off, Jeff, Mike, and Stephen Galperin, 
with five 1000 lb bags and approximently 500 cubic feet of air to fill the lift 
bags.  Arriving at Grave's Ledge, we quickly found the marker, dropped 
anchor and hit the water.  On the first dive we chained lift bags to the anchor 
and began to fill them.  At this stage, mother nature was cooperating; we had 
20 - 30 feet of vis and the current was light.  Using NITROX 1, we extended 
our bottom times into the 60 minute range, but still had some more work to 
do.

On the second dive it took about 15 minutes to finish filling the bags, and the 
anchor rose majesticly off the bottom.  Unfortunately, it only rose about three 
feet off the bottom.  A close inspection revealed that a line from a ghost pot 
was holding the anchor down.  Gathering his courage, Mike swam under the 
anchor to cut the line.  The anchor floated slowly to the surface.

When we arrived at the surface only 3 or 4 inches of the lift bags were showing.  
Our calculations had been so close that there was no extra lift.  The in-water 
weight of the anchor and chains were almost exactly the capacity of the lift bags.  
However, we didn't have any more liftbags, so we began to rig for towing.  While 
we were rearrainging the boat and lines, the tide and wind shifted.  This caused the 
boat to be pushed against the lift bags, opening the exhaust valve on one bag.  Just 
enough air was released to return our catch to the bottom.

At this point it was 1:00 PM, a south east wind was building up the seas, 
and it was threatening rain.  Not to be disillusioned, we radioed NES and 
begged Faith to get us another lift bag.  She agreed to meet Rick from 
Subsalve in Braintree.  After more discussion on the boat, we decided that we 
needed 2 bags to be sure of getting the anchor home.  So we radioed Faith 
back, caught her on the way out the door and asked for a second bag.  So she 
called Rick on his cell phone and talked him into going back for another bag.  
When they met on 1-95 to exchange packages Rick surprised Faith with a 
2000 and a 1000 lb lift bag.  He said he didn't want to make another trip on a 
Saturday. 

So Faith met us at the boat ramp behind the Volunteer Yacht Club to give us the 
lift bags.  By this time, it was 4:00 PM, the wind was south east at 25 kt, and the 
seas were 2-4 feet.  So we scrubbed the mission until Saturday.

With threats of firing Mike if we returned without the anchor this time, we left 
on our second attempt.  This day the crew was Jeff, Mike, Stephen and Mehmet 
Mandalinci.  When we arrived at Grave's Ledge, the conditions were similar to the 
day the ship had wrecked.  It was foggy with a small swell left from the day 
before.  Mike went down first dragging the 2000 lb lift bag, and Stephen followed 
with the video.  Jeff and Mehmet descended with the tanks to fill the lift bags and 
the extra chain to rig the bags.

We found the anchor in 35 feet of water perched on a 3 ft wide ledge with a 70 
degree slope leading down into 80 feet of water.  Had the anchor fallen off the 
legde we would have had to make a third attempt since we would have needed 600 
cubic feet of air to fill the lift bags.  The salvage gods were smiling on us.  As 
Mike filled the 2000 lb bag, the giant shackle that would have held the anchor to 
its chain broke.  We had to cut new chains and resecure the 2000 lb bag.  As we 
resumed filling the 2000 lb lift bag, the anchor floated to an upright position on 
the narrow ledge.  Mike swam over to the flukes and started filling the last lift bag.  
As that last bag filled, the surge caught the anchor, and it slowly bounced several 
times on the narrow ledge.  Holding onto the pinnacle, you could feel the rock 
tremble under the impact.  After what seemed like an hour but was probably not 
more than a minute or so, the anchor rose slowly at first, then gaining speed, and 
finally, rocketing to the surface.  For the first time in 57 years, the anchor saw day 
light!

When we got to the surface the conditions were much better than Friday.  The 
wind was west; the sun was shining, and the seas were choppy but less than 1 foot.  
The lift bags were riding high, so after a quick inspection, we rigged for towing 
and were on our way.  A salvage company would have had a crane and a barge 
waiting to pull the anchor.  We didn't have such luxury.  Our top towing speed was 
2.2 knots with an average of under 2 knots.  The hour boat ride to the wreck 
became 7.5 hours back.  During this all day trip, Mehmet was reading the story of 
the sinking to us.  We were all surprised to learn that Saturday, April 22 was 57 
years to day from the sinking.  All agreed that fate had prevented us from being 
successful on the day before.

Towing an object is heavy enough to sink the boat presents another problem - if 
the anchor sinks in deep water, it will take you with it.  On the ride back, we had a 
person standing by to cut the inch thick tow line in case of emergency.  We also 
had to deal with boat traffic in the shipping lanes.  At one point we had an ocean 
going tug with an oil barge on a collision course, and the law of tonnage said we 
had to move.  Fortunately, the tug and barge headed off down the channel and 
away from us. Towing that much resistance gave the 21 ft.  Depth Charge little 
manuverability.

As darkness settled in, we found ourselves approaching the mooring field in 
Salem Harbor.  Jeff's abillities were tested as he brought our prize through the 
maze of moorings and into Hawthorne Cove Marina.  In the home stretch, Jeff was 
tested again as he manuvered the Depth Charge between the docked boats to get 
the anchor to the travel lift pit.  As we approached the end of our journey, the 
anchor (which drew 10 ft.) ran into 9.9 feet of water.  We had to run the Depth 
Charge to full power to drag it off the bottom.  Then we all opened the beverages 
of our choice as our prize settled into the lift pit, to be hoisted onto a trailer on 
Monday.

The recovered anchor is now in the process of being cleaned and restored.  It is 
on outdoor display for public viewing at Northeast Scuba, 125 Liberty Street in 
Danvers, MA.

... But It Is Certainly One Of The Biggest.
By Stephen Galperin


